

AL 3639.'.£.10
THOREAU
EMERSONS OBITUARY
OS-ID


1
L- ^
t)
J. IU

HARVARD
COLLEGE
LIBRARY


f-


•^x


HENRY D. THOREAU
^EMERSON'S OBITUARY
318
-.











v *
HENRY D. THOREAU
EMERSON'S OBITUARY
NUMBER ONE
LAKELAND, MICHIGAN
EDWIN B. HILL
1904


A
i
:
HARVARD
^UNIVERSITYl
LIBRARY
MAn /o 1952


HENRY D. THOREAU.
DIED at Concord, on Tuesday, 6 May, Henry D.
Thoreau, aged 44 years.
. The premature death of Mr. Thoreau is a bitter dis-
appointment to many friends who had set no limit to
their confidence in his power and future performance.
He is known to the public as the author of two re-
markable books, "A Week on the Concord and Mer-
rimack Rivers," published in 1849, and "Walden, or
Life in the Woods," published in 1854. These books
have never had a wide circulation, but are well known
to the best readers, and have exerted a powerful influ-
ence on an important class of earnest and contempla-
tive persons.
Mr. Thoreau was born in Concord, in 1817; was
graduated at Harvard University, in 1837. Resisting
the example of his companions, and the advice of
friends, he declined entering either of the learned pro-
fessions, and for a long time pursued his studies as his


4 ... V ''- HENRY 1). THOREAV.
T ■ :V11 •
genius.led jiifiif without apparent method. But being
a good mathematician and with an early and controll-
ing love of nature, he afterwards came by imperceptible
steps into active employment as a land-surveyor,—
whose art he had first learned in the satisfaction of
his private questions, — a profession which gave him
lucrative work, and not too much of it, and in the
running of town lines and the boundaries to farms
and woodlands, carried him precisely where he wished
to go, — to the homes of new plants, and of swamp
and forest birds, as well as of wild landscape, ami
Indian relics. A man of simple tastes, hardy habits,
and of preternatural powers of observation, he became
a patient and successful student of nature in every
aspect, and obtained an acquaintance with the history
of the river on whose banks he lived, and with the
habits of plants and animals, which made him known
and valued by naturalists. He gathered a private
museum of natural curiosities, and has left a large
collection of manuscript records of his varied experi-
ments and observations, which are of much more than
scientific value. His latest studies were in forest trees,
the succession of forest growths, and the annual incre-
ment of wood. He knew the literature of natural his-
tory, from Aristotle and Pliny, down to the English
writers on his favorite departments.


HENRY I). THOREAU. 5
But his study as a naturalist, which went on in-
creasing, and had no vacations, was less remarkable
than the power of his mind and the strength of his
character. He was a man of stoic temperament,
highly intellectual, of a perfect probity, full of prac-
tical skill, an expert woodsman and boatman, ac-
quainted with the use of tools, a good planter and
cultivator, when he saw fit to plant, but without any
taste for luxury, without the least ambition to be rich,
or to be popular, and almost without sympathy in any
of the common motives of men around him. He led
the life of a philosopher, subordinating all other pur-
suits and so-called duties to his pursuit of knowledge
and to his own estimate of duty. He was a man
of firm mind and direct dealing, never disconcerted,
and not to be bent by any inducement from his own
course. He had a penetrating insight into men with
whom he conversed, and was not to be deceived or
used by any party, and did not conceal his disgust at
any duplicity. As he was incapable of any the least
dishonesty or untruth, he had nothing to hide, and
kept his haughty independence to the end. And
when we now look back at the solitude of this erect
and spotless person, we lament that he did not live
long enough for all men to know him.
E.


r >


NOTE.
It is believed that a peculiar interest attaches to this reprint
of Emerson's obituary on the death of Thoreau. Perhaps the
history of the "copy" from which it is now reprinted will
make this plain.
It is known to but a few that Thoreau had a correspondent
in Michigan and as early as 1856. The reading of " Walden"
had filled the earnest Michigan man with a fierce hunger for
Thoreau's first book,"A Week on the Concord and Merrimack
Rivers," and failing to find a bookseller who could supply a
copy, he had written directly to Thoreau, whose reply we are
permitted to publish through the courtesy of the present owner
of the holograph:
Concord, Jan'y 18th, 1856.
Dear Sir:
I am glad to hear that my "Walden" has interested you —
that perchance it holds some truth still as far off as Michigan.
I thank you for your note.
The " Week" had so poor a publisher that it is quite uncer-
tain whether you will fmd it in any shop. I am not sure but
authors must turn booksellers themselves. The price is Si.25.
If you care enough for it to send me that sum by mail (stamps
will do for change), I will forward you a copy by the same
conveyance.
As for the " more" that is to come, I cannot speak definitely
at present, but 1 trust that the mine — be it silver or lead — is


b HENRY 1). THOREAl".
not yet exhausted. At any rate, I sliall be encouraged 1 >y the
fact that you are interested in its yield.
Yours respectfully,
iiENrY 1>. TllOrEAf.1
The correspondence thus begun ended in November, 1859, at
which time Thoreau was devoting himself to defending the de-
spised Captain John Brown and fervently advocating his cause.
It was not until the month following Thoreau's death that
his Michigan admirer learned of it, and he at once wrote a let-
ter of condolence to the surviving mother and sister. Then,
beside letters from Sophia Thoreau, the following came to him,
in reply to a direct enquiry which had been directed to one of
Thoreau's Concord intimates:
Concord, June nth, 1862.
My DEAR Sir:
Your letter of the 8th instant inquiring concerning the death
of Henry Thoreau is just received, and I hasten to answer it.
A slight notice of the funeral was printed in the Boston
"Transcript" of May 10th (1 think), and the "Advertiser" of
the 9th had a notice of himself by Mr. Emerson.
A more extended notice, consisting of the Eulogy spoken at
the funeral, with additions, will appear in the "Atlantic Monthly"
for August — and will be the answer to many of your enquiries.
His illness was a lingering one —a year and a half, at least,
the last six months of which he was able to go out doors but
little. He endured it with great patience and sweetness, pre-
serving his gayety and wit to the last. I was often with him,
having known him well for the last seven years.
You have indeed missed much in not having met him, for he
well supported the impression left by his writings.
1 .Same I 'npublished Letters of Henry /). and Sophia E.
Thoreau: A Chapter in the History of a Still-horn Hook.
p. 27. The Marion I'ress. 1899.


--.
HENRY I). THOKKAl". (J
His mother and sister, who survive him, Mrs. Cynthia and
Miss Sophia Thoreau, desire me to say that they remember
your friendly letters to Mr. Thoreau, and have desired to send
some token of their remembraance. They therefore enclose
these verses of Ellery Channing's and Mr. Emerson's "Adver-
tiser" sketch.
At the funeral, which was in the church, Mr. Emerson spoke
after the clergyman — Mr. Channing's hymn was sung, and Mr.
Alcott read some passages from the writings of Mr. Thoreau.
I hope you may carry out your purpose of visiting Concord,
and shall be glad to talk with you then on a subject so dear to
us both. Yours truly,
F. B. Sanborn.
After being carefully kept for thirty-live years the original
recipient of these posthumous tributes transferred them to the
present editor, and thus it is that they are no longer entrusted
to the precarious keeping of a scrap-book.
Doubtless many who read Emerson's obituary notice in the
"Advertiser " some forty years ago (when Thoreau's fame was
but "a cloud out of the sea, as large as a man's hand ") thought
the culogium only the fond exaggeration of a fervent friendship,
but to-day Time, the incorruptible Arbiter, has confirmed the
judgment pronounced while yet the mother's tears were warm
upon the face of her dead son. Not only confirmed, but en-
larged the judgment; for Emerson himself had not fully known
the extent of Thoreau's acquirements and capacity. It will be
a matter of astonishment and of surprise to many other than
the few now living in "old Concord" who had known Tho-
reau in the flesh, to learn on the best of authority that as a
classical scholar he was far superior to Emerson and fully the
equal of the over self-conscious Lowell; and as an original
Thinker, it is safe to declare that Thoreau will be read when
Lowell is forgotten and Emerson remembered chiefly as the


10 . HENRY D. THOREAU.
leading exponent of "the Transcendental movement" in the
United States. The charm of personality perishes with the
memory of those who felt its spell; the inspiration of the
Thinker is the deathless inheritance of the race: and this pro-
nouncement confidently abides the incorruptible arbitration of
the coming centuries.
'It is noteworthy that Emerson's obituary notice, written as it
was while yet Thoreau's clay was uncoflined, contains all of
real worth and importance that was included in the more care-
fully prepared eulogy which was spoken in the very church
wherein Thoreau had made his impassioned " Plea for Captain
John Brown " and which subsequently appeared in the "Atlan-
tic Monthly," but without the "additions" predicted by the
Concord correspondent: at least any additions that are now
detectable, for Emerson's spoken words were not "reported."
As the "Atlantic" paper forms the biographical introduction
to Thoreau's first posthumous book, the student of literature
can pass an interesting hour by comparing the germ from the
lioston "Advertiser" with the later and carefully finished pro-
duel of the scholar's study; the former reveals Emerson as a
friend, the latter shows his consummate art as a writer.








-'





.S


"*N
-








3 2044 018 865 758

bey
RETURNED TOTHpniSDBOOK,SNOT
BEFORE THE IA?T n?£ARY ON OR
BELOW. NON-REcJ,ptAS STAMPED
NOTICES DOES n/)T CVr-°V£RDuE
BORROWER PROMN0^DX^/HE
TUU 1985 I
rj
tJWS
3
WOK DUE
.A A .* A A -* .*..». A A.
