
Three little kittensR. M. (Robert Michael) Ballantyne























i



THK KITTENS TELLING. OF THE LOSS OF THEIR MITTENS.


THREE
LITTLE KITTENS.
IT COMUS
Author of "Mister Fox," &c.
A tale of a cat will here be found,
With three little charming kittens,
And all that they said, and thought, and did,
When they lost—and found—their mittens.
PUBLISHED BY THOMAS NELSON AND SONS,
LONDON, EDINBURGH. AND NEW YORK.
Mpooom.


! Li:,::.Vi.v
50079B
lii i . .M .U...B
K IV. i ti


tittle
Allegro vivace.

is h h
Voice.
* 4 *
^—#
Three lit - tie kit - tens they lost their mit - tens, and they be - gan to
i a i i
—
;; ■ ■;
4—4-
I » - -.
1 • I

1 N
4
recce
, u <
'—F—V
. m m—
A A AAA
9 m
]
"What! 1
ost your mit-tens, you
naugh - ty ki
t - tens; then
jrou shall ha
ost."
ve no
j h rn
H
/—\
8 1 I i h
■
:r—!—
4
. t
•

3 9X688


"THREE LITTLE KITTENS."



m tMt Mims"
(CHILDEEN'S DUETT )
Allegro vivace.

*—*
• • 11 v
0 m
I' "-' r I U
Three lit - tie kit - tens they lost their mit - tens, and they be - gan to
J J • »
4h

s—
■
■

M
V
—P5
w=
>.
4
• 4
—4
i—1
1 4
« 4
1—4
i—L

"- 4
—•
1—
1—V
4
• 4
ft*
cry, "Oh! mam-my dear, we sad - ly fear, our mit • tens we have lost." "What!
—v
*—*
■4 4-
W
r r f f r g=g ^ r r
7 p p PI v r v ]/ I p
lost your mit-tens, you naugh-ty kit-tens; then you shall have no pie." "Mi - ew,
r— V
I
L
1 'W 1
4-4 •


"«jjm m	 Sffirra."
TVHREE little kittens they lost their mittens,
And they began to cry,
"Oh! mammy dear,
We sadly fear,
Our mittens we have lost!"
"What! lost your mittens
You naughty kittens,
Then you shall have no pie."
Miew, miew, miew, miew,
Miew, miew, miew, miew.
The three little kittens they found their mittens,
And they began to cry,
"Oh! mammy dear,
See here, see here,
Our mittens we have found."
"What! found your mittens,
You little kittens,
Then you shall have some pie."
Purr, purr, purr, purr,
Purr, purr, purr, purr.
The three little kittens put on their mittens,
And soon ate up the pie;
"Oh! mammy dear,
We greatly fear,
Our mittens we have soil'd"
"What! soil'd your mittens
Sou naughty kittens!"
Then they began to sigh,
j ~ o— n'
Miew, miew, miew, miew,
Miew, miew, miew, miew.
ITie three little kittens they washed their mittens,
A.nd hung them up to dry;
"Oh! mammy dear,
Look here, look here,
Our mittens we have wash'd."
"What! wash'd your mittens,
You darling kittens!
But I smell a rat close by!
Hush! hush I" Miew, miew,
Miew, miew, miew, miew.


THtttS ''
MTTti ilTTin
Three little kittens lost their mittens,
And they began to cry,
"Oh! mother dear
We very much fear
That we have lost our mittens."
So the three little kittens ran to their mother and held
up their paws to show that the mittens were really lost.
Now, the kittens' mother was a large gray cat. She
wore a cap on her head, and a pair of red mittens on
her arms. And when she saw the three little kittens
sitting before her, with their paws up, and looking half-
frightened, half-astonished, she became angry and said
"Mee-aow!" Then she sat down before them, looking
very fierce, and said, "Mee-aow!" again. At this the
three little kittens began to cry, and said they were
very sorry indeed for losing them; but they could not
tell how it happened, for they were quite sure they had
them on when they were eating their breakfast of bread


10
THE THREE LITTLE KITTENS.
and milk, and that they did not take them off when they
went to play.
"But when did you miss them?" asked the cat.
"We don't remember," answered the two eldest kittens.
"Oh! I missed mine just after I went to sleep on the
rug," replied the youngest.
At this the other two kittens went into fits of laughter;
but their mother gave them each such a slap on the head,
and a scratch on the nose that they sat down again trem-
bling before her.
"Come, come; naughty things," she said, "you must
not laugh when I am scolding you. It is an easy thing to
lose mittens, but not at all easy to find them again. As
a punishment I will not speak to you until you have found
them. Ah! Miss Spotty, it is all very well to cry, but it
would be much better if you never did anything to make
you cry, or to oblige me to scold you. Fuff! mee-aow!
fuff! I'm very angry."
The cat was silent for a short time, then she said,
"Now, sit still, kittens, do you hear, and wipe your eyes
and noses, and listen to me. You are very bad for having
lost your mittens. It cost me much money to buy worsted
for them, and much time to make them, so, since you have
so carelessly,



THK KITTKNS ABE SCOLDED.-rago. in





THE THREE LITTLE KITTENS.
11
"Lost your mittens,
You naughty kittens,
Then you shall have no pie.
Mee-aow, mee-aow, mee-aow,
Go; you shall have no pie.
Mee-aow, mee-aow, mee-aow."
Their mother said this last "Mee-aow" so fiercely, and
followed it up with such an awful "Fun0," that the poor
kittens turned round and scampered away as if they were
mad, with their hair all standing on end.
Now, the eldest kitten was black; the second was
white; and the youngest spotted, so they called each
other Blackey and Whitey and Spotty.
"What shall we do?" said Blackey to his sisters when
they had fled under a sofa.
"I don't know," said Whitey, and "I don't know,"
said Spotty.
Blackey shook his head and twirled his tail slowly,
and said, "Dear mother is very angry with us. And no
wonder, for we had no business to lose our mittens. I'm
very, very sorry about it."
"And I'm very sorry too, but I cannot think where
we have put them," said Whitey, sadly.
Oh dear me!" sighed Whitey, "I do wish that dear
mamma had never made them for us. Of course it was


12 THE THREE LITTLE KITTENS.
very, very kind of her to do so, but they have given us
so much trouble—I really think we should have been
much happier without them."
"Hush, hush! my dear sister," said Blackey, "you
must not speak that way. You might just as well say
you wished we had been made without tails because
they give us so much trouble, and are so often caught
in the doors and trod on by careless people."
Spotty could hardly speak as she looked up with tears
in her eyes and said, "Oh dear! I'm so grieved about
the pie!" and she rubbed her stomach gently with her
paw.
"What think you," cried Blackey, starting up, "shall
we look for them?" So they cried, " Yes, yes," and scam-
pered off to search.
"I'll find them if I should search for a week," said
Spotty with a very determined "Mee-aow." And they
did search, and found them too. Then they ran joyfully
to their mother, waving their mittens in the air, and
uttering shouts of a very peculiar kind, which were no
doubt intended for hurrahs! although they did not
sound very like it.
"Aren't you glad we have found them?" said Blackey.
"Of course I am," replied Spotty, whisking her tail. So,






THE ESCAPK OP THE MOUSE.-Page 14.



THE TUKEE LITTLE KITTENS GOING TO EAT THE PIE.-P.gel6.





THE THREE LITTLE KITTENS.
13
The three little kittens found their mittens,
And they began to cry
"Oh! mother dear,
See here, see here,
See, we have found our mittens."
The cat received them with a sweet smile and a long, loud
"Purr-r-r-r."
. " Well, my dear children," she said, "I am glad you
have found your mittens, and I hope you will take care
not to lose them again."
"Oh yes! dear mother," cried the three kittens "we
will take great care of them in future."
The cat smiled and screwed up her whiskers with joy
to find that her little ones were so anxious to please her;
and then she said,
"Don't you find them nice, useful things, my dears?"
Blackey looked at Whitey and said nothing—but
Spotty gave a little jump and said,
"Well, we did'nt think so at first, but I believe they
are very nice and useful after all, now I think of it, for
they are constantly being lost and keep us employed
looking for them, and then they are for ever catching
on corners and nails, and making me tumble, which
makes Blackey and Whitey laugh very much, and that's
funny, you know, if its nothing else!"


14
THE THREE LITTLE KITTENS.
Now, while they were so busy talking, a mouse peeped
out of its hole, to see if there were any crumbs lying
about, and as it saw that the cat and kittens were not
watching, it ventured to run a little along the floor. In
a moment Spotty caught sight of it. Up went her tail,
which grew nearly as thick as her little body, and away
she went in pursuit, with her claws out, and her eyes
flashing, and her mouth open. Blackey and Whitey
and their mother instantly followed; but the little
mouse was so quick that it got back in time, and when
Spotty crammed her nose and paws into the hole, there
was nothing to be found there. Blackey and Whitey
each ran against Spotty in their haste, and the cat fell
on the top of them all, amid much noise and mee-
aowing, which caused the little mouse to laugh, although
it trembled a good deal too, when it thought of the
danger it had escaped.
When they had recovered from the flutter into which
this had thrown them, the cat praised her children;
called them good, active, little dears, and said, "No
doubt that naughty mouse is laughing at us just now,
but never mind, we shall catch it yet, depend upon it,
and have it stewed with green pease for supper, my
pets; so now,


THE THREE LITTLE KITTENS.
IS
"Put on your mittens,
You silly kittens,
And you may have some pie.
Purr-r, purr-r, purr-r,
Oh! let us have the pie.
Purr-r, purr-r, purr-r."
On hearing this, Spotty gave such a sudden scream of
delight that her brother and sister jumped five times
their own height into the air with the fright, and when
they alighted on the ground again, their backs and
tails were up, and their hair standing on end, so that
they looked like two round balls of fur!" What do
you mean by startling us so?" they asked, with an
angry little " Fuff."
"Oh! I beg pardon," replied Spotty, looking very
meek and innocent, "I did not wish to startle you, but
I'm so glad that we are to have the pie after all!" and
Spotty was so overjoyed at the thoughts of it, that she
gave another scream, made up of a "Purr" and a "Mee-
aow" mixed together, and scampered round the room
till she was quite out of breath. Blackey and Whitey
ran after her all the time; but, although Spotty was
very little, and very fat, just like a dumpling, she ran
so fast that they could not catch her for five minutes
at least.


18
THE THREE LITTLE KITTENS.
Then they all rolled together in a lump, so that you
would have thought that they were one cat with three
heads, and three tails, and six pairs of legs!
Then they separated with a wild cry, and bounced
away from each other with their backs up as usual, and
their tails very thick, and walking very much sideways,
just like crabs, and staring at each other all the time as
if they intended to have a very fierce battle.
As they stood thus, Blackey caught sight of his own
tail and immediately began to run round after it. Seeing
this, Whitey and Spotty rushed at their brother, clasped
him in their arms, and they all rolled along the floor
again in a knot of confusion, hugging and worrying
each other as if they were really angry.
"Let go my tail, Blackey, you rascal," cried Whitey.
"No I wont!" replied Blackey.
"Keep your claws out of my nose, yee-aw! mee-aw!
a-a-ow! mee—! spurt! fluff—!" shrieked Spotty.
In the meantime, their mother took up her knitting and
looked on with a smile, purring very loudly all the time.
At last she called to them to stop; and, when they were
seated in a row before her, she told them to go and eat
the pie, and said, "Spotty, you little monkey, don't stuff
yourself too much!" So,






SPOTTY FALLS INTO THE WASHING TUB.—Pmse«


THE THREE LITTLE KITTENS.
17
The three little kittens put on their mittens,
And soon ate up the pie.
"Oh! mother dear,
We greatly fear
That we have soil'd our mittens."
The pie was a very fine one. It was made entirely of the
tails of mice and rat's noses, and was covered with a
rich crust of toasted cheese. Besides this, there were a
great many different kinds of spices in it. This may,
perhaps, surprise you, for it is well known that cats
are not fond of spices; but you must remember that
the kittens we are speaking of were different from all
other kittens in many things. They were fond of spices,
so the cat put into the pie a little pepper, a little
cinnamon, a little nutmeg, a little ginger, besides a good
many cloves and some mustard and a large quantity of
canary's claws, and the whiskers of mice.
The moment Spotty saw it she made a rush forward,
and would have jumped right into it; but Blackey saw
what she was going to do, so he caught her and said in
a reproving voice, "My dear sister, you should not be
so impatient. Let us all begin to it together. There
is no need of hurry."
Spotty blushed deeply and said,
"Oh! dear brother! I'm very foolish, and very sorry,
B


18
THE THREE LITTLE KITTENS.
but "Spotty could say no more, for at that moment
the smell of the crust passed her nose, and, unable to
resist it any longer, she burst away from Blackey, rushed
up to the pie, and plunged her fore-paws and her
nose into the very middle of it! Seeing this, the other
two gave a whisk with their tails and did the same,
and, in ten minutes, the whole was finished—not so
much as the point of a nose or the end of a tail was
left. When they had finished and were trying to lick
their lips, paws, and whiskers clean, Spotty gave a
terrible "Mee-aow," and cried out, "Oh dear me! my
mittens are soiled. What will dear mamma say? alas!
alas!" The other two also began to cry, for they too had
soiled their mittens, so that they were not fit to be seen.
But Blackey soon dried his eyes and said, "Let us go
and tell mamma, perhaps she wont be angry. At any
rate it is better to tell her at once." So they agreed
and went and told her. The cat could only hold up
her paws in astonishment, and cry, alas! alas!
"Oh dear! oh dear! mee-oo! oo!" cried Blackey.
"I'm very, very sorry, but it was the pie's fault."
sobbed Spotty.
Whitey wept in silence.
The cat shook her head and exclaimed, sadly,


THE THREE LITTLE KITTENS.
19
"Soil'd your mittens!
You naughty kittens!
Then they began to sigh,
Mee-aow, mee-aow, mee-aow.
Then they began to sigh,
Mee-aow, mee-aow, mee-aow."
It was a sad sight to see these three little kittens, sitting
with their mittens all covered over with grease, and the
tears rolling down their cheeks; and it was a sad sight
to see their poor mother quite unable to speak for sorrow
at their foolishness. For, after all, they were really
good kittens, and all the evil they did was owing
to thoughtlessness. So the cat sighed and said that it
was very sad, and the kittens wept more than ever; but
Spotty caught sight of Blackey's tail, which was moving
at the point, and she could not help making a sudden
dart at it. Then she remembered that it was wrong to
play when she was naughty, so she sat down and cried
again, wiping her eyes with the end of her tail, and
looking very wretched.
"Oh! forgive us, dear mother!" said Blackey, "and
we will try to behave better in future."
"Forgive us, dear mother!" said Whitey, "and I will
never do anything wicked again."
"Forgive us, dear mother!" cried Spotty, and I'll try
50079B


20
THE THREE LITTLE KITTENS.
all I can to remember not to be naughty. I'll never
dirty your ball of worsted by chasing it, and I'll never
upset the tea-kettle, and I'll never scratch Blackey's
face even in fun, and I'll never grow wild with delight
or annoy you any more, and I'll never—never—Oh dear!
boo-hoo! I wish I was only good!" and little Spotty
put both her paws up to her eyes, and rubbed her face
with the soiled mittens, and cried as if her very heart
would break.
"Ah! yes, forgive us! do forgive us this time!" they
all cried out together.
"I forgive you, my children; but you have made me
very miserable;" and the cat shook her head mournfully
and sobbed as she went on with her knitting. Now, while
she lifted her paw to wipe away a tear, and put her
spectacles right, she let fall the ball of worsted which
rolled slowly along the floor. In an instant the three
kittens forgot their sorrow, rushed after the ball,—Spotty
first as usual—and knocked over a small table where
stood a beautiful china bowl, and a glass of flowers,
which were smashed to atoms. With a general yell
they all fled out of the room in extreme terror.
After this the kittens began to think that they might
try to wash their mittens;—so,


!,
t



TIIKY EAT THE PIE.—Page is.



THE KITTENS ARE NAOGHTY.—Pure *


A»r>R. I SN'CX AN'D
t.i.!;:::< ra stations
K L


THE THREE LITTLE KITTENS.
21
The three little kittens washed their mittens,
And hung them out to dry;
"Oh! mother dear,
Do you not hear,
That we have washed our mittens."
These kittens were very determined little creatures, and
when they had once made up their minds that a thing
ought to be done, they always did it in spite of all
difficulties; so they resolved to wash the mittens. Whitey
laughed at their troubles, and Blackey laughed too, but
as the soap-suds made his eyes smart and water very
much, it just seemed as if he were crying and laughing
at the same time, and this looked so funny that Whitey
laughed till she nearly cried, and let her mittens fall into
the water two or three times.
They washed them in a small tub; and much difficulty
they had in doing it. The sides of the tub were so high
that Blackey and Whitey were scarcely able to reach the
water, and Spotty was so small that she had to climb
up and stand on the edge of it, while she put down her
paws to wash. Then Whitey said she couldn't hold the
soap, it was so slippery; and some more suds went
into Blackey's eyes and made him nearly blind; and
the soap was lost in the water two or three times, and
they had great difficulty in finding it again. All this


22
THE THREE LITTLE KITTENS.
time Spotty was sitting on the edge of the tub, washing
very busily, when Blackey said, "Take care, Spotty, you
will fall in if you don't mind."
"No fear!" cried Spotty; but, just as she said so,
down she went, head first and tail last, and when she
recovered her feet again and stood up on her hind legs,
her eyes staring with fright, and her mouth gasping for
breath, she looked so funny, covered all over with soap-
suds, that the other kittens laughed very much and then
cried, after which they pulled her out of the tub. But
this was no easy thing to do—and then when they did
get her out, they rubbed her with a towel, and held
her up to the fire to dry; but they were so stupid
that they singed the point of her tail very badly!
However they got her dried at last, and dried their
mittens also.
"Now, darling," said Whitey, giving Spotty a kiss,
"do you feel better? are you quite dry?"
"Of course she is," said Blackey, pulling her tail
slily.
When all was ready they took the mittens in their paws
and ran joyfully with them to the cat, who was still at her
knitting, looking very sad indeed. When she saw what
they had done she exclaimed with pleasure and surprise,


THE THREE LITTLE KITTENS.
23
"Washed your mittens!
Oh! you're good kittens;
But I smell a rat close by,
Hush! hush! mee-aow, mee-aow,
We smell a rat close by,
Mee-aow, mee-aow, mee-aow."
As she spoke, a rat sprang out of its hole, rushed across
the room, along the passage, and out into the garden.
The cat instantly threw down her knitting, tossed her
spectacles into the fire, jumped over the heads of her
children, and dashed away in chase of the rat, while
the three little kittens dropt their mittens and followed
her as fast as their little legs could wag, mee-aowing
wildly as they went, and tumbling over the window
in their haste; so that Spotty fell flat on her back, and
Whitey fell into Spotty's arms, and Blackey fell on the
top of them both. But they soon scrambled up again
and then they saw the cat standing at the mouth of a
hole into which the rat had run.
They all stood watching the hole for a good long
time, for they knew that the rat did not live there,
and that it was not a comfortable hole at all, being not
very deep and rather damp, so that it was likely the
rat would catch cold if it remained long there. The
cat stood near the hole to be ready to pounce on


24
THE THREE LITTLE KITTENS.
the rat the moment it should show its nose, and the
three kittens stood a little way behind her, looking on
very anxiously.
"I wish very much," said Whitey, "that we could
catch a rat, I think the three of us might manage to
kill it easily."
"Oh!" whispered Spotty as her eyes opened wide with
surprise, "just look at mamma's tail! such a size!"
"Just look at your own," said Blackey, "it's not much
less!"
Spotty turned her head to look at it, but at that
moment the rat rushed out of the hole, and her mother
flew off after it. The kittens immediately followed,
and away they went over fields, and hedges, and
ditches; with their eyes flashing, their tails up, and
their hair on end. So the rat, and the cat, and the
three little kittens fled out of sight, and never were
heard of more!



THE WHOLE FAMILY GIVE CHASE TO A RAT.-P.geM.








-1
