
3 3433 07581241 6


;' -tP^T JWl" Sf-yg aw*
\ - r'-jjfitC<^^.PV.-?dui*%fy





3@8S^S?^g?SS
Cr^.aT^^^jr/j^XT.iK^'- »v^N. -,*rj



--
-











THE
PEAEL OF THE ANDES
at fete an&
BY
GTJSTAVE AIMAED
ACTHOE OP "ADTEIfTUEBE3," "iJtDIAJT CHIEF," "THAU HOUTEE,"
"HEATES OF THE PEAIEIE8," "TSAFFEs'S DA11GHIXE," "HOBS
BLAYEE," "OOLB SSEZEE8," "KID HACK," BIO.
LONDON:
J. A. BEEGER, IS, CATHEEINE ST., STEAND,
AND ALL BOOKS1SLLEBS.





THE
PEAEL OF THE ANDES
, fait 0f
BT
GTJSTAVE AIMAED
iUTHOB OF "1DYEBTUEEES," "llTDIi» CHHF," "TK1I1 HU1TTEI,"
"PJItATK8 OF TUE FJUIEIES," "TKAFPEl's IIAIKIHTEE," "IIGIB
8L1TM," "GOLD SEEXEES," "EED THICK," EIO.
LONDON:
J. A. BEEGEE, 13, CATHEEINE ST., STEAND,
AND ALL BOOKSELIiEES.
*&• .


T.-'t NVtV YOKX
FUBAJCUBRARY
538299
TlLUi.™ rci ...
1b i^ I.


7s
THE PEARL OF THE ANDES.
CHAPTER I.
IN THE CABILDO.
WHILE Dona Rosario effected her escape by the assis-
tance of Curumilla, as recorded in the "Adventuress,"*
Don Gregorio; who possessed a very powerful mind,
bestowed every attention upon liis distressed friend.
Don Tadeo, although subdued for an instant by a
terrible emotion almost beyond human endurance, was
not long in regaining his senses. On opening his eyes
he cast a bewildered look around him, but as soon as
memory threw light iitf.o Lip tirai'^ lie' let' fcis head
sink into his hands, and gave" a free' vent "to" his grief.
When he saw that his attritions w&re 'no longer neces-
sary, Don Gregorio, with the tact innate in all superior
minds, felt that grief ruqulvud 'complete solitude, and
retired, without informing his friend of Ms' departure.
It is said and repeated to satiety, that tears give
relief; this may be true with regard to women of a
. nervous and impressionable nature, whose grief most
s frequently displays itself in tears, and who, when they
are dried, are astonished at finding themselves consoled;
\ but if tears do women good, which we easily admit, ou
the contrary wo a^evfc that they make men suflcr


2 Tin; PEARL OF THE ANDES.
terribly. Tears, with men, are the expression
powerlessness, of an impossibility, against whicl
most implacable wiil is no stronger than a bla
straw. The strong man who is reduced to wee
confesses himself conquered; he succumbs beneat]
weight of misfortune, and a longer struggle bee
impossible; hence, the tears he sheds fall back dro
drop upon his heart, and sear him like a red-hot:
To weep is the most frightful punishment to whi
man of courage and intelligence can be condemned
Don Tadeo wept! Don Tadeo, the King of D
ness, who a hundred times had smilingly looked d<
In the face !—who had such a miraculous escape—
man whose iron will had so rapidly crushed everytl
that opposed the execution of his projects; who I
word, a gesture, a frown, governed thousands of i
submissive to his caprices, wept! Weak and in
without strength and without courage, he lay weep
like a child! H» uttered cries that threatened to bu
his chest, and was constrained to acknowledge tl
there is but one supreme will in the world, one po\>
.••_>••••••••••• *
alone—•tfitaoi G6,<J! •.:.: .::.•:
«. • \^ * * ** ** * *• *
But Don Tatleo'was^i<5t a'man whom grief, howev
intense, could* a<jpr33S.fti- sf.length of time. Angri
brushing the^tesfttf Ffoih' his inflamed eyes, he drc
.•••• •••••• • •
himself ui>,'.pr«.ucl.'YUii.t<VijiLle.;
"Oh, all is hot edded y^tThe cried. Then passit
his hand over his brow, which was inundated by col
perspiration, he added "Courage! I have a people t
save before I avenge my daughter! Family affection
must not prevail before the duties of the statesman; '.
will'carry out my mission as Dictator!"
He clapped his hands, and Don Gregorio appeared
He saw a^ glance the ravages which grief had made


IN THE CABILDO. 3
in the mind of his friend, but he saw also that the
King of Darkness had subdued the father. It was
about seven o'clock iu the morning; but the various
apartments of the cabildo were already swarming with
courtiers and petitioners.
"What are your intentions with regard to General
Bustamente?" Gregorio asked. •
Don Tadeo was calm, cold, and impassive; all traces
of emotion had disappeared from his face, which had
the whiteness and rigidity of marble. Seated at a
table upon which he was tapping carelessly with a
paper-knife, he heard this question with the preoccupied
air of a man absorbed t)y serious reflections.
"My friend," he replied, "we yesterday, by means
which I deplore, since they cost the lives of many,
saved the liberty of our country, which was on the
verge of ruin, and assured the stability of its govern-
ment; but if, thanks to you and to all the devoted
patriots who fought on our side, I have for ever over-
thrown Don Bustamente, and annihilated his ambitious
projects, I have not on that account taken his place.
If I did so, I, in my turn, should be a traitor, and our
country would only have escaped one peril to fall into
another at least as great."
"But you are the only man who"
"Do not say that," Don Tadeo interrupted, warmly;
"I do not recognise in myself the right of imposing
upon my fellow-citizens ideas and views which may be
very good, or which at least I believe to be so, but
which, perhaps, are not theirs. The man who wished
to enslave us is subdued, his tyranny no longer op-
presses us, and my part is ended. I ought to leave to the
people, of whom I have the honour of being one of the
most obscure members, the right of freely choosing tho
1—a


4 TUB PEARL OP TUB AKDES.
man who is henceforward to watch over their iritei
and govern them."
"And who tells you, my friend, that that ma
not yourself?"
"I do," Don. Tadeo replied, in a firm voice.
Don Gregorio gave a start of surprise.
"That astonishes you, does it uot, my friend t '.
what is to be said? So it is. Yesterday I despatch
expresses in all directions, in order that nobody im
be mistaken as to my intentions; I am only anxi<
to lay down power, which is a burthen too heavy
my worn-out strength, and to return again to priv
life, which," he added, with a smile of regret, "it h
perhaps, been better had I never left."
"Oh! do not say that," Don Gregorio replii
warmly; "the gratitude of the people is eternally d
to you."
'•' All smoke, my friend," Don Tadeo observed, iroi
cally. "Are you sure the people are pleased wi
what I have done? What proof have you that tin
would not prefer slavery? The people are gre,
children, who have always been led with words, ar
who only bestow praise upon oppressors and decn
statues to tyrants. Let us end this; my resolutio
is talcen, and nothing can change it."
"But "Don Gregorio wished to add.
Don Tadeo stopped him with a gesture.
"One word more," he said. "To be a statesman, m;
friend, a man must march alone in the way he ha
marked out for himself; he must have neither children
relations, nor friends, but must look on men as the
pawns of a vast chess-board; in short, he must be
insensible to the beatings of his own heart, otherwise
a time will come when, whether fro1* fatigue or other


IN THE CABiLDO. 0
causes, the beatings of his heart will be heard, and
then all is lost. The man who is iu power ought to be
only human in appearance."
"What do you mean to do, then I"
"In the first place, to send General Bustamente to
Santiago; although the man merits death, I will not
take upon myself the responsibility of his condemna- *
tion; enough blood has been shed by my orders. He
shall depart to-morrow with General Cornejo and the
senator Sandias; those two personages will not allow him
to escape—they are too much interested in his silence.
Besides, he shall be sufficiently escorted to secure him
from a coup de main, if, though I do not believe it
probable, his partisans attempt a rescue."
"Your orders shall be punctually obeyed."
"They are the last you will receive from me, my
friend."
"But why V
"Because this very day I will transfer my power to ,
your hands."
"But, my friend"
"Not a word more, I beg ol you; I have made up
my mind. Now accompany me to this poor young
Frenchman, who has so nobly, at the peril of his life,
defended my unfortunate daughter."
Don Gregorio followed him without reply.
The count had, by the directions of Don Gregorio,
been placed in a chamber where he had received the
greatest attention. His situation was satisfactory, and,
excepting great weakness, he felt himself much better.
, The visit of Don Tadeo caused him sincere pleasure.
Trangoil-Lanec had not been mistaken : by a mira-
culous chance the poniard had only glanced through
the flesh. Loss of blood alone caused the weakness


G THE PBAKL OF Tlife AJsDES.
which the young man felt j his wounds had all-
begun to close, and iu two or three days, at mosl
hoped to resume active life. Through a slight
rather characteristic bravado, Louis had dressed ]
self, and was reclining with a book in a large £
chair, when the two gentlemen entered. Don Ti
went towards him eagerly, and seizing his hand s
warmly:—
"My friend, it is God who has thrown you and y
companion upon my passage. I have only known;
a few months, and I have already contracted towa
you both, particularly towards you, a debt which i
impossible I can ever discharge."
At these friendly words the young man's e;
glistened, a smile of pleasure played upon his lips, a
a slight colour tinged his pale cheeks.
"Why attach so high a value to the little I ha
been able to do, Don Tadeo?" he said. "Alas!
would have given my life to preserve Dona Rosario.
"We shall find her again !" Don Tadeo observe
energetically,
"Oh ! if I were able to get on horseback," the youi
man cried, "I should have set out ere no in searc
of her."
At this moment the door opened, and a peon wli
entered said a few words in a low voice to Don Tadeo.
"Let him come in! let him come in!" the latte:
cried, in considerable agitation; and turning toward:
Louis, who looked at him with astonishment, added,
"We are about to hear some news."
An Indian entered; it was Joan, the man Curumilla
had been unwilling to kilL


JOAN, 7
CHAPTER II..
JOAN.
THE sordid clothes which covered the person of the
Indian were stained with mud, and torn by thorns and
briers. It -was evident that he had made a hasty-
journey through woods and along bad roads. He bowed
with modest grace to the three gentlemen, crossed his
arms upon his breast, and waited quietly to be inter-
rogated.
"Does not my brother belong to the valiant tribe of
the Black Serpents?" Don Tadeo asked.
The Indian made a sign in the affirmative. Don
Tadeo was well acquainted with the Indians, and knew
that they only spoke when necessity required; this
silence, therefore, did not astonish him.
"What is my brother's name?" he resumed.
The Indian raised his head proudly.
"Joan," he said; "in remembrance of a warrior of
the pale-faces whom I killed in a malocca."
"Good," Don Tadeo replied, with a melancholy
smile; "my brother is a chief renowned in his tribe."
Joan smiled haughtily.
"My brother has arrived from his village; he has,
no doubt, business to transact with the pale-faces, and
he comes to me that I may do equal justice between
him and the persons he has to deal with."
"My father is mistaken," the Indian replied,
sharply; "Joan is not a Huiliche, he is a Puelche
rarrior; my father knows he is so. Joan asks the
iclp of no one; when he is insulted, his own lance
.venges him."


8 THE PEARL OP THE ANDES.
Don Grcgorio and Louis followed with great cu
this conversation, of which they did not unde
a word, for they could not at all guess what Don
was aiming at.
"My brother will excuse me," he said; "lie
have some reason for coming to me."
"I have one," said the Indian.
"Let my brother explain himself then."
"I will answer my father's questions," said
bowing.
Such are the Araucanos. However serious m
the mission with which they are charged, even tl.
delay might cause the death of a man, they i
resolve to speak clearly, or to render an account ol
mission, unless the questioner succeeds, by mea
address, in making them explain themselves. Cert
Joan wished no better than to tell everything, ft
had made the greatest possible haste to arrive; bi
spite of all that, he would only allow the words t
drawn from his mouth one by one, and with an
pearance of regret. This may seem extraordinary
incomprehensible; it is, however, scrupulously a
rate. We"have ourselves been the witness and vie
of it many times during our partly compulsory i
dence among the Araucanos. Don Tadeo knew w
sort of a man he had to do with. A secret prese
ment told him that he was the bearer of import
news: he was not, therefore, discouraged, but follov
up his questions.
"Whence does my brother come V
"From the tolderia of San Miguel." -~
"That is some distance from the city; is it lo
since my brother left it?"
"The moon was about to disappear behind the t<


JOAN. 9
of the mountains, and the Southern Cross alone shed
its splendid light upoa the earth, when Joan com-
menced his journey to come and seek my father."
It was nearly eighteen leagues from the village of
San Miguel to the city of Valdivia. Don Tadeo was
astonished at such diligence, which, only tended to con-
firm his opinion that the Indian was the bearer of im-
portant news. He took from the table a glass, which
he filled to the brim with aguardiente de pisco, and
presented it to the messenger, saying—
"My brother will drink this com of fire-water;
probably, the dust of the road sticking to his palate
prevents him from speaking as easily as he could wish.
When he has drunk his tongae will be loosened."
The Indian smiled; his eyes sparkled greedily; he
took the glass and emptied it at a draught.
"Good," he said, smacking his lips and replacing the
glass upon the table. "My father is hospitable; he is
truly the Great Eagle of the Whites."
"Does my brother come from the chief of his tribe V
Don Tadeo, who never lost sight of his object, con-
tinued.
"No," Joan replied; "itwas Curumilla that sent me."
"Curumilla!" the three men cried, involuntarily
starting.
Don Tadeo breathed more freely: he had found the
track.
"Curumilla is my penni," he said; "no harm has
happened to him, I hope?"
"Here are his poncho and his hat," Joan replied.
"Heavens!" Louis exclaimed—" he is dead!"
Don Tadeo felt an oppression at his heart.
"No," said the Indian, "Curumilla is an Ulinen;
[lie is brave and wise. Joan had carried off the young


10 THE PEARL OF THE ANDfcfc.
pale, blue-eyed maiden; Curumilla might have I
Joan; lie was not willing to do so j he prefe
making a friend of him."
The whites listened to these words anxiously. '.
withstanding their obscurity, they were sufficie
clear to enable them to make out that the Indian c
was on the track of the ravishers.
"Curumilla is good," Don Tadeo replied; "his h
is large and his soul is not cruel."
"Joan was the chief of those who carried off
young white girl. Curumilla changed clothes -<t
him," the Indian continued, sententiously; "and
said to Joan, 'Go and seek the Great Eagle of
Whites, and tell him that Curumilla will save
young maiden, or he will perish!' Joan has co
without stopping, though the»journey was long."
"My brother has acted well," said Don Tad
warmly pressing the hand of the Indian, whose fi
was radiant with smiles.
"If my father is satisfied," he said—"that
enough."
"And my brother carried off the pale girl 1 W
he well paid for that T
"The great cavale with the black eyes is generous
the Indian said, smiling.
"Ah! I knew it r cried Don Tadeo; "still tin
woman !—still that demon! Oh, Dona Maria! w
,ye a terrible account to settle some day 1"
Louis arose painfully from his seat, and approaching
Don Tadeo softly, said, in a voice trembling witf
emotion, "My friend, Dona Rosario must be saved!"
"Thanks, boundless thanks, for your devotion, my
Mend!" said Don Tadeo; "but, alas ! you are weak,
Bounded—scarcely escaped from death."
