
The blessed damozelDante Gabriel Rossetti


TH€
UWIYGRS1TY Of CALIFORNIA
LIBRARY
(8<!8

forte <$<!&v$j&£cj(> t^o fe^tf,
$L»Q«nJb of o®c nvg«a
C>C LI BR IS


V
s





THE BLESSED DAMOZEL


The poem given here is as it
originally appeared in The Germ








The Crayon Study of the Head of
the Blessed Damozel by 'Dante
Gabriel Rossetti is reproduced
by permission of Mr Frederick
Hollyer.





THE
By D. G. Rossetti
Introduction
BLESSED By W M Rossetti
Decorations
DAMOZEL By W. B. Macdougall

Boston
L. C. Page & Company, Inc.
1898


All Rights Reserved


Jnfrobucfton
DANTE GABRIEL ROSSETTI, born on 12th May 1828,
wrote The Blessed Damozel in the nineteenth year of
his age, or before 12th May 1847. The pen or the
partiality of a brother is not needed for saying that the poem,
if considered simply from the poetical point of view, ranks as
highly remarkable among the works of very juvenile writers; and
still more so when we take into account its total unlikeness to any
other poem then extant. I at least know of nothing which pre-
sents any similar combination of mediaeval devoutness, human
passion, and remote yet intimate idealism—an earthly love wearing
a spiritual halo so bright and dazzling that the eye hardly dis-
tinguishes the point of juncture between the one and the other.
In old art I am cognizant of no precedent, and in the art con-
temporary with Rossetti's adolescence none. So much be it
permitted me to say on the question of personal initiative, or
what we call originality.
I can remember in a general way the time when my brother
wrote The Blessed Damozel, but could not myself have fixed
the date as being before the completion of his nineteenth year.
He himself fixed it, in a letter to Mr Hall Caine (1880 or 1881)
which that gentleman has published: "Jenny (in a first form) was
written almost as early as The Blessed Damozel, which 1 wrote
—and have altered little since—when I was eighteen." Mr Caine
has also quoted a statement made to him verbally by Rossetti in
the autumn of 1881, in connexion with Edgar Poe's Raven.
v
q■ o r -r q o
■J \.J Kj • *w


"He remarked that, out of his love of it while still a boy, his
own Blessed Damozel originated. 'I saw,' he said, 'that Poe
had done the utmost it was possible to do with the grief of the
lover on earth; and so I determined to reverse the conditions,
and give utterance to the yearning of the loved one in heaven."
The term here, "while still a boy," should be understood
with a certain reservation. The Raven was first published in
America on 29th January 1845, and Rossetti had probably entered
upon his eighteenth year before he saw it. I can still recollect
his bringing home some cheap English magazine containing a
reprint of the poem, and the zest with which, having already
perused it, he re-read it over and over again to the family.
A letter from Dante Rossetti to his mother, 20th May 1873,
has been published, in which he says: "I remember that for the
family Hotchpotch, long and long ago, I first wrote The Blessed
Damozel, and also a poem about a portrait. Have you these
ancient documents, and could you let me have the same if in
my own handwriting? Not, however, if you set store by them.
"What is the date thereof?" This so-called Hotchpotch, or Weekly
Efforts, was a sort of family magazine concocted in our household;
but it seems to have come to an end at a date, 1843, much earlier
than that of The Blessed Damozel. There was some later per-
formance of the same kind, not yet wholly cancelled from my
memory, and that must in reality have been the recipient of the
Damozel and The Portrait. Whether the original manuscript
was traced in consequence of the letter here quoted from, and
whether it came into my brother's hands, I am unable to say: it
has not come into mine—more's the pity.
These two statements—the one made by Mr Caine, and the
other in Rossetti's letter—appear to be all that can at present
be said with any certainty as to the date and genesis of The
Blessed Damozel. It may safely be assumed that, as soon as
vi


my brother had done it, he knew that he had produced a good
thing, and some few other people knew the same: the work must
have confirmed his internal consciousness that he was born a poet.
The Blessed Damozel had been preceded by some of his able
translations from the Italian and German, and by various original
verses absolutely or comparatively weak. It was nearly con-
temporary, not only with The Portrait just mentioned and the first
beginning of Jenny, but also with My Sister's Sleep, Ave, parts
of Dante at Verona, of A Last Confession, and of The Bride's
Prelude, and the sonnets Retro me Sathana and The Choice.
The Blessed Damozel was one of the poems which Dante
Rossetti sent, about December 1847, to Mr William Bell Scott,
then Master of the Government School of Design in Newcastle-
on-Tyne. My brother did not as yet know Scott personally;
but, being a great admirer of some of his poems, and not ignorant
of his work as an artist, he had entered into correspondence with
him, and now sent some of his own productions for consideration.
Scott, in his Autobiographical Notes, records: "What was my
wonder and perplexity when I found The Blessed Damozel, My
Sister's Sleep, and other admirable poems, marshalled under the
title of Songs of the Art Catholic I" This expression "admirable
poems" may, by the way, be contrasted with Mr Scott's state-
ment, elsewhere in the same book, that the mass of Rossetti's
earlier poems, except Jenny and Sister Helen, are "comparatively
boyish and worthless." The general title thus adopted by my
brother in 1847, Songs of the Art Catholic, is one that he never
put into print. It has a juvenile twang, yet is not without its
significance. One can perceive that by the word "Art" he
meant, not simply and solely poetic art, but a certain association
with the tone of pictorial art of the olden days, the days when
that art had none other than a Catholic ideal. Not that Rossetti
was himself a Catholic, Roman or other; but he felt the potency
vii


of the Catholic spirit in all art, and the kinship of its inspirations
to those which were simmering in his own mind.
Towards the end of February 1848, Rossetti addressed another
literary man not personally known to him, Leigh Hunt, soliciting
an opinion upon some of his poems, including The Blessed Damozel.
Hunt replied in remarkably kind and encouraging terms, referring
to Rossetti's " Dantesque heavens, without any hell to spoil them."
This certainly applies to The Blessed Damozel; and my brother,
in a family letter which has been published, speaks of the poem
as being "written in a kind of Gothic manner, which I suppose
he is pleased to think belongs to the school of Dante."
The foregoing details may be of not much moment in them-
selves; but, taken together, they are of some weight as showing
how far advanced Rossetti was, long before the "Prajraphaelite
Brotherhood" existed, towards that state of feeling which pro-
duced the Brotherhood, and before he had become associated
with Millais or Holman Hunt, or even (the earliest of the three,
for practical purposes) Madox Brown. He wrote The Blessed
Damozel early in 1847 (if not indeed in 1846), and the Prae-
raphaelite Brotherhood was not founded until September 1848.
He wrote it "in a kind of Gothic manner," and included it with
other poems under the general title Songs of the Art Catholic.
Of the first form of the composition, that which appeared in
the family magazine towards 1847, no trace remains, so far as
my knowledge extends. The second form is that which was
printed in The Germ, and which constitutes our present reprint.
To this, therefore, I shall now address myself.
Before publishing the poem in The Germ, my brother added
four stanzas to it. I cannot say with any precision which they
were; but I think it not unlikely that they may have been
stanzas 6, 9, 13, and either 14 or 17—beginning respectively,
"It lies from Heaven across the flood—And still she bowed her-
viii


self, and stooped—We two will stand beside that shrine—We
two will lie i' the shadow of"—and "Alas, and though the end
were reached." The poem was inserted in No. 2 of The Germ,
February 1850. Not many people read it there; but those who
did were, I think, unanimous in pronouncing it a very uncommon
and a beautiful performance.
The subsequent publications of The Blessed Damozel were in
The Oxford and Cambridge Magazine, 1856, and in the volume
Poems, 1870. In each of these instances some changes were in-
troduced; and even since 1870 the composition, in later re-issues
of the Poems, remained not absolutely unaltered. I will here
name all those alterations of The Germ version which appear to
me worth specifying on the present occasion. Along with these,
some few others are notified in the elaborate work which Mr
William Sharp brought out in 1882, Dante Gabriel Rossetti; a
Record and a Study. Such other slight changes as he mentions
may count as mere details of diction or metre. Rossetti had,
from a very early age, a__noticeably rich poetic diction, and
a fine sense of metre j but the first was blemished by some
youthful mannerisms, and the second did not invariably avoid
"quips and cranks" of accentuation, more conformable to Italian
than to English prosody. This is what he neatly called (in
a letter of 1869) "the impossible intonation of that early
epoch."
Stanza 1—
"Her blue grave eyes were deeper much
Than a deep water, even"—
was changed, in The Oxford and Cambridge Magazine, into
"Her eyes knew more of rest and shade
Than waters stilled at even ";
ix


and now stands,
"Her eyes were deeper than the depth
Of waters stilled at even."
Stanza 7, "But in those tracts," etc., is now entirely omitted.
Stanza 8 was altered slightly in The Oxford and Cambridge
Magazine, and again in the Poems of 1870; but until this latter
date inclusive the notion of " games" continued to figure. There
is certainly something very funny about the idea of souls in heaven
"playing at holy games "(the "holy" disappeared in 1870); as
if any such game as battledore and shuttlecock could become any
the holier by being played on the margin of the sea of glass
mingled with fire, or chess would be hallowed by altering the
names of the pieces, all except the bishops. Soon after 1870
the "games" were dropped, and "lovers newly met" were very
advantageously substituted; and now (after some other minor yet
not uninteresting changes) the lines stand—
"Around her, lovers, newly met
'Mid deathless love's acclaims,
Spoke evermore among themselves
Their heart-remembered names."
Stanza 9. "Calm" and "warm" make a "cockney rhyme."
In The Oxford and Cambridge Magazine the lines were modified
thus—
"And still she bowed above the vast
Waste sea of worlds that swam,
Until her bosom must have made
The bar she leaned on warm."
The cockneyism, though shuffled, was not thus corrected. In
1870 came—
z


"And still she bowed herself, and stooped
Out of the circling charm,
Until" etc.;
and "warm" thus obtained at last a proper rhyme.
Stanzas 10 and 11, the latter beginning "I wish that he were
come to me." Between these two stanzas, a stanza (for which
there is no sort of equivalent in The Germ) was introduced in
1856. It contains the phrase (which many readers of the poem
will remember)—
"The curled moon
Was like a little feather
Fluttering far down the gulf."
In the Poems of 1870 a second stanza also is interpolated here;
and it figured, but somewhat further on, in The Oxford and
Cambridge Magazine as well. It constitutes one of the lover's
parenthetical speeches, beginning:—
"Ah sweet! Even now in that bird's song,"
and ending (in the magazine) :—
"Down all the trembling stair."
In the volume form, "echoing" has replaced "trembling."
Stanza 11.
"Have I not prayed in solemn heaven?
On earth, has he not prayed?"
In the volume of Poems these lines are altered thus: —
"Have I not prayed in heaven? on earth,
Lord, Lord, has he not prayed?"
I scarcely know which phrase is preferable. Perhaps Rossetti
considered that the epithet "solemn " had a mannered tone, for he
xi


Jnfrofcucfion
cancelled it both from this stanza, and also from stanza 21, "the
unnumbered solemn heads," which now stands (but I much question
whether it is for the better) "the clear-ranged unnumbered
heads."
Stanza 13.
"Whose lamps tremble continually
With prayer sent up to God;
And where each need, revealed, expects
Its patient period."
In the Poems:—
"Whose lamps are stirred continually
With prayer sent up to God;
And see our old prayers, granted, melt
Each like a little cloud."
As to this I will only say that the original lines appear to me
so good that it needed some hardihood in their author to alter
them. The image of the "little cloud" counts for something; but
it makes a considerable flaw in the rhyming.
Stanzas 16, 17.
These two parenthetical stanzas, spoken by the lover, are highly
noticeable. The first of them appears to me beautiful and
most effective—the phrase "Alas for lonely heaven!" being one
of the most moving audacities in the poem. The 17th stanza
(which in The Oxford and Cambridge Magazine was printed as the
nth) is less telling in expression and rhythm, but it introduced
an important point, where the lover says of himself:—
"May the close lips that knew not prayer
Praise ever though they would?"
This indicates past undevoutness in the lover, or perhaps even
a certain degree of unbelief. Rossetti must eventually have con-
xii


sidered it better to exclude any such idea; and for these two
stanzas he substituted in 1870 only one stanza—
"Alas! We two, we two, thou say'st!
Yea, one wast thou with me
That once of old. But shall God lift
To endless unity
The soul whose likeness with thy soul
Was but its love for thee?"
Stanza 19: "And bosoms covered" has been altered into
"And foreheads garlanded."
Stanza 22. The last four lines ("To have more blessing,"
etc.), are somewhat stiff in phrase and sound. In The Oxford
and Cambridge Magazine they were changed to—
"Only to live as once on earth
At peace,—only to be
As then we were—being as then
Together, I and he."
These lines have since been retained—only that "at peace"
has given way to "with love," a clear improvement.
Stanza 23, "Yea verily when he is come," has been omitted
in the volume form.
From these remarks it will be perceived that, in the general
conception—the informing spirit and treatment—of The Blessed
Damozel, no change whatever was made; if only we except that
detail (stanza 17) which implied, or might be construed as im-
plying, a certain sceptical tendency in the lover, a germ of
disunion between himself and his beloved in matters of faith.
The poem which appeared to Dante Rossetti good enough for
the family magazine in 1847 or '46 continued up to his death
in 1882 to appear to him good enough to stand in the forefront
xiii


of his published work; heedfully revised indeed on more than
one occasion, but not transmuted.
My illustrious friend Mr Swinburne wrote to me some while
ago that a better service to the memory of my brother as a poet
could hardly be rendered than to print the variants in the suc-
cessive published forms of his several poems; for (as he said),
while the changes introduced were almost invariably for the better,
the older readings were often, from the point of view which had
prompted them, so felicitous that few persons except Dante
Rossetti (with his insatiable passion for the best) would have had
the heart to sacrifice them. I assent to this judgment of the most
competent judge living in our country, very great as a critic, if far
greater still as a poet; and I think the present edition of the first
printed form of The Blessed Damozel, and the remarks which are
here made to bring out its details, will confirm Mr Swinburne's
opinion.
My brother twice painted The Blessed Damozel as an oil-
picture, life-sized. The first instance was for Mr William Graham,
than whom he had no more sympathetic commissioning friend.
Mr Graham himself suggested the subject, and found that Rossetti
had already contemplated painting it. The work was in hand from
1873 t0 l^77i anc* contained in the background several groups
of the
"lovers newly met
'Mid deathless love's acclaims,"
all of them in blue drapery. Afterwards, 1879, he painted a
second picture of the subject for Mr F. R. Leyland, also a hearty
and loving admirer of his work. The two pictures, though par-
tially similar, are far from identical in treatment: the second one
does not contain any of the background groups. There was also
a crayon head of the Damozel for Mr Leyland in 1872, and
another for Lord Mount-Temple in 1874; and (if I am not
xiv


Jnfrobucfton
mistaken) a third for Mr L. R. Valpy towards the latter date.
I am unable to say from recollection whether any or which of
these heads resembled the heads of the Damozel in the oil-
pictures: the head that is reproduced in the present volume is
wholly different from those in the paintings, though studied from
the same model. This was Miss Alexa Wilding, one of Rossetti's
frequent and highly valued models for heads.
In 1895 Mr Byam Shaw exhibited at the Royal Academy a
picture from The Blessed Damozel, bearing the motto,
"We two, she said, will seek the groves
Where the Lady Mary is."
It is a wort ofL skill and ability, but did not appear to me to
be in the same key as the poem—a key in which sentiment and
beauty, along with the tone of medievalism, are prime and in-
dispensable qualities. A much less successful attempt—I think,
indeed, a distinctly unsuccessful one—had been made in 1886 by
an American artist, Mr Kenyon Cox, who published in New York
a sumptuous volume of photographed designs, along with the poem.
Here I discern not much authentic sentiment or beauty, and no
medievalism at all. The form of presentment is rather classic
than medieval, and even the classic does not count in it for so
much as the life-academy. The designs, however, are those of a
very well-qualified and proficient artist; and on their own showing
—though not as being analogous to Rossetti's poem—they deserve
no small amount of praise. There may be some other artistic
illustrations of The Blessed Damozel; but either I have no know-
ledge of them, or else at the time of my writing they do not recur
to my memory.
The present is the first British reprint of the poem as it stood
in The Germ. There was, however, an earlier and private reprint
in America. It bears the imprint—" Twenty-five copies privately
xv


printed for C. L. Williams at the De Vinne Press, MDCCCXCIV."
Mr Clarence L. Williams, the gentleman who undertook this re-
print, favoured me with a copy. It includes a sonnet, "D.G.R.,"
written by Mr Edmund Gosse in 1871.
The Blessed Damozel has often been used for the purpose of
public recitations, and I believe that not long ago it was set to
music, and performed in public. Of this, however, I cannot speak
with certainty.
As to published translations, I know of two in particular, but
must no doubt from time to time have seen some others. There
is a French translation by Gabriel Sarrazin, La Damoiselle Bertie,
included in his volume Poetes Modernes de I'Angleterre, 1885. It
is only a little abridged, two or three stanzas being omitted. This
translation, following the French practice of several years past, is
in choice prose, and is a good one. An Italian translation is La
Fanciulla Beata, by Ettore Ciccotti, 1893. It was delivered as
illustrating a discourse upon Rossetti, in which some remarks of
Max Nordau were contested; for this learned author, in his book
on Degeneration, has dissected the Damozel with a scalpel un-
sparingly, and I conceive not always judiciously, applied. Signor
Ciccotti's rendering is in verse, but not the same metre as the
original: it seems to me to be a moderate success, not wholly
exempt from misunderstandings of the English text. I know
another Italian translator of certain poems by Rossetti (Sister
Helen, Staff" and Scrip, &c.) who, were he to undertake The
Blessed Damozel, might be expected to prove both more literal
and more literary than Signor Ciccotti—indeed, remarkable as
entering into the finer shades of meaning in the original. This
is my son-in-law, Signor Antonio Agresti of Florence, whose
other translations show great skill and success. They are not
unlikely to be published pretty soon in Florence.
It would be easy to cite eulogistic verdicts on The Blessed
xvi


Jnfrobucfton
Damozel, delivered by William Morris and some others of the
men best entitled to pronounce. I will, however, not enter upon
this line of comment: and in fact The Blessed Damozel has never
wanted for fervent admirers among poetic readers. There are
some persons who look with aversion upon Dante Rossetti and all
his doings: but, if we go outside this circle, into that other circle
where he is valued at all, we find that for few of his performances
is he more valued than for The Blessed Damozel. It was the
brightest jewel in the circlet of his youth; and none that he
added in his prime has bedimmed its lustre, or (to use a more
colloquial expression) has "taken the shine out of it."
W. M. ROSSETTI.
London, February 1898.
1)














THE
^7^5T VE<%SE


THE
SECO&CP VE%SE
*.


II
X
Her robe, ungirt from clasp to hem,
No wrought flowers did adorn,
But a white rose of Mary's gift
On the neck meetly worn;
And her hair, lying down her back,
Was yellow like ripe corn.



Ill
Herseemed she scarce had been a day
One of God's choristers;
The wonder was not yet quite gone
From that still look of her's;
Albeit to them she left, her day
Had counted as ten years.


THE
THH£D VE%SE


THE
FOURTH VE^SE






V
It was the terrace of God's house
That she was standing on,—
By God built over the sheer depth
In which Space is begun;
So high, that looking downward thence,
She could scarce see the sun.


THE
&IFTH VE^SE


THE
SIXTH VE%SE






But in those tracts, with her, it was
The peace of utter light
And silence. For no breeze may stir
Along the steady flight
Of seraphim; no echo there,
Beyond all depth or height.


THE
SEVENTH VE^SE
■■■■


THE
EIGHTH VE%SE








THE
&(JNTH VEViSE


THE
TENTH VE%SE






XI
44 I wish that he were come to me,
For he will come," she said.
"Have I not prayed in solemn heaven?
On earth, has he not prayed?
Are not two prayers a perfect strength?
And shall I feel afraid?
IT


THE
ELEVENTH VE%SE
V


THE
TWELFTH VE%SE








\ THE
THIRTEENTH VERSE


THE
gOU'UXEENTH VE^SE






XV
"And I myself will teach to him—
I myself, lying so,—
The songs I sing here; which his mouth
Shall pause in, hushed and slow,
Finding some knowledge at each pause
And some new thing to know."


THE
FIFTEENTH VE^SE


THE
SIXTEENTH VE<%SE
■



XVI
(Alas! to her wise simple mind
These things were all but known
Before: they trembled on her sense,—
Her voice had caught their tone.
Alas for lonely Heaven 1 Alas
For life wrung out alone!



XVII
Alas, and though the end were reached?..
Was thy part understood
Or borne in trust? And for her sake
Shall this too be found good ?—
May the close lips that knew not prayer
Praise ever, though they would ?)


THE
SEVENTEENTH VE^SE


THE
EIGHTEENTH VEVISE








THE
NINETEENTH VE^SE


THE
TWENTIETH VE^SE



XX
44 He shall fear haply, and be dumb.
Then I will lay my cheek
To his, and tell about our love,
Not once abashed or weak:
And the dear Mother will approve
My pride, and let me speak.



XXI
"Herself shall bring us, hand in hand,
To Him round whom all souls
Kneel—the unnumber'd solemn heads
Bowed with their aureoles:
And Angels, meeting us, shall sing
To their citherns and citoles.


THE
TWENTY-FIRST VE<RSE


THE
TWENTY-SECOND VEI&E
-



xxn
"There will I ask of Christ the Lord
Thus much for him and me:—
To have more blessing than on earth
In nowise; but to be
As then we were,—being as then
At peace. Yea, verily.





THE
TWENTY-THIRD VE'RJSE


THE
TWENTY-FOURTH VE<RSE



XXIV
She gazed, and listened, and then said,
Less sad of speech than mild;
"All this is when he comes." She ceased
The light thrilled past her, filled
With Angels, in strong level lapse.
Her eyes prayed, and she smiled.



xxv x
(I saw her smile.) But soon their flight
Was vague 'mid the poised spheres.
And then she cast her arms along
The golden barriers,
And laid her face between her hands,
And wept. (I heard her tears.)



TWENTY-^IFTH VE%SE



Turnbull & Spears
Printers, Edinburgh





:
r


THIS BOOK IS DUB ON THE LAST DATE
STAMPED BELOW
AN INITIAL FINE OF 25 CENTS
WILL BE ASSESSED FOR FAILURE TO RETURN
THIS BOOK ON THE DATE DUE. THE PENALTY
WILL INCREASE TO SO CENTS ON THE FOURTH
DAY AND TO SI.OO ON THE SEVENTH DAY
OVERDUE.
FEu 211933
FEB 22 1933
M*R 4 1936
MM 27 1336
0CT 23 1936
23Feb'6lBM
IN STACKS
FEB 9 1961
.-s...... . ....
V/. ■ ! i iSn!
0^
1 21-50m-l,'3J
1
